title: Week Nine
date: 2014-07-28 20:26:14
categories:
 - Weekly Updates
---
I really need to be doing more stuff with the blog!

I'm leaving for a two week trip to Alaska on Wednesday, which means that there will be no updates for the next couple of weeks.

However, I plan on doing the following:

* Finishing the MongoDB course - I have one more lesson, which I think I can do tomorrow, and the test, which I'll have to try to make time to do in Alaska.
* Do a lot of work in the book - this is my time to read and do book problems. I haven't really been doing much of those lately...
* Work on pyORMatic - this will depend on whether or not there's time. I can always do pyORMatic after I get back, but I will have lots of long bus/train trips, so I can probably use my laptop for this.
* Take pictures! (Not really related to the course)


However, I was busy with MongoDB over the past week. I learned about the aggregation framework, which is essentially analogous to SQL's "clauses," I.E. WHERE, GROUP BY, HAVING, SELECT, ORDER BY, LIMIT, SUM, and COUNT. Since these statemenets are so integral to SQL (especially SELECT, WHERE, ORDER BY, etc), I never really thought about how they would translate to MongoDB, so I was kind of shocked when the majority of the work we did was without these aids. I suppose that the majority of MongoDB's operations can be emulated in a programming language much more easily than SQL,

Mongo's versatility does come at a cost, however. Even something as simple as counting the number of orders in a database is extremely verbose:

```
db.orders.aggregate( [
   {
     $group: {
        _id: null,
        count: { $sum: 1 }
     }
   }
] )
```

Compare to SQL:

```
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM orders
```

More examples can be found [here](http://docs.mongodb.org/manual/reference/sql-aggregation-comparison/)

Mongo's way of doing things makes longer, more complicated queries much simpler than MySQL, since there's a practically infinite amount of nesting that can be done, and it can be done in a much more intuitive way than SQL. However, there's a number of little gotchas that make things rather annoying (though this could easily be my fault for being so used to SQL).

Thankfully, my perfect homework score still stands (despite me having to guess on one of the problems...). 
