title: Week Five
date: 2014-07-1 14:13:52
categories:
 - Weekly Updates
---
This week I started the MongoDB university course. I actually started the Java course some time ago, but decided to hold off on that in favor of the Python course, a much more pleasant language to program in. Also, who can live without the Monty Python references?

Unfortunately, I misread the submission due date for the 1st week's homework as 5 o'clock PM PST, when it was actually 5 o'clock PM UTC. It's entirely my fault, since I've been so used to everyone on the internet using Pacific time as the standard time (as it should be!). Regardless, it's not all bad, and they drop the lowest week's homework score, so as long as I do well the rest of the time, I shouldn't have too much of an issue.

The first week was mostly about setting up mongo, Python, and an introduction to JSON. Since I was already well versed in JSON and Python, it was mostly review for me, though I did learn some interesting things about some of the advantages and drawbacks of the JSON syntax, as well as what exactly mongo was (I had assumed that it used the same structured query language as popular databases such as MySQL, Postgres, or Oracle used, only with some extensions). I was actually pleasantly surprised that Mongo's shell was simply a javascript interpreter with a couple of custom built in functions. Being able to take advantage of such a rich programming language in executing queries in the mongo shell was quite nice.

However, initial impressions of Mongo have lead me to believe that it is rather clunky and clumsy. JSON is rather nice, but some of the syntaxes that Mongo uses for the conditions, sorting, limits, etc are unintuitive at best and require constant reference to documentation. The functions are not very descriptive, and to do something as simple as selecting all records from the database where the score is greater than a certain number requires several JSON objects, some of which are nested several layers deep.

One nice thing about Mongo is how fast it is - benchmarks have shown it to be much faster than any SQL database, so I have pretty high hopes for using Mongo for big data.

I'm not yet convinced about the merits of schemaless databases, but I'll reserve judgement for now.
