title: Week Six
date: 2014-07-7 20:45:40
categories:
 - Weekly Updates
---
This week, I've done the 2nd week of the MongoDB course. Thankfully, unlike last week, I managed to submit the homework on time. Mongo has been taking up a large majority of the time that I've been able to spend on the databases class, but hopefully, I'll get to spend more time next week.

One of the things that I personally believe is valuable and increases the depth of knowledge out of a course is teaching others. I've been trying to be active on the MongoDB forums, answering questions that I have the ability to. At first, this was very difficult, but I've been able to do it more and more easily. It's always nice to be thanked, as well.

The primary goal this week for the Mongo course was CRUD operations. One thing that I'm not a huge fan of is Mongo's schemaless design. All of the operations feel fairly arbitrary and cobbled together. Also, though it is nice to have native extensions in the language that you are using, there are some annoyances. It's difficult to translate database queries between languages, since they use the programming language's design features. Thankfully, python has data structures that are more or less analogous to Javascript's Object and Array types, but for a language like Java, C, or others, I imagine it's much more difficult to wrap your head around.

As a result, even though Mongo has a rich querying langauge that's pretty well represented by PyMongo, I still prefer to do the bare minimum with PyMongo, and perform all the sorting, limits, and manipulations within Python itself. I've been trying to force myself to do things with PyMongo as much as possible, but it leads to a lot of frustrated cries of ["THIS COULD BE DONE IN ONE LINE!"](http://gag.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/javadoc/com/google/gag/annotation/remark/ThisWouldBeOneLineIn.html)
