title: Week Four
date: 2014-06-22 13:21:23
categories:
 - Weekly Updates
---

So keen followers of this blog may notice that Week Three is mysteriously missing from the list of blog posts. This was intentional, you see, because this is a computer science class. As such, computer scientists only know how to count in multiples of two, so this will be the only blog post until week 8 of the course <sup>not really</sup>.

What actually happened was far less exciting - I got rather sick over the past couple weeks, and in between work and trying to rest up, I was forced to abandon my academic pursuits. However, I'm now back! As a result of being off for so long, I'll attempt to make this post longer than normal. So last week, the class met for the 2<sup>nd</sup> time. We discussed our projects and what we had learned up to that point. One of the things we talked about were some of the difficulties with using flat files to store information in databases.

Flat files are a very simple method of storing data that involves the application using them directly writing data to and from the filesystem. In general, the programmer implements a flat file data store from scratch in his program, handling reading and writing by himself, in some sort of standard format. Flat file database stores suffer from a couple of issues:

* There's no concurrent access since opening a file handle places a file lock on it.
* Reading and writing from a file incurs a lot of overhead (This is alleviated by caching, but increases the complexity of a program)
* The program is in charge of file management and writing the files. Occasionally there are libraries that help with this, such as INI or CSV libraries.

The main idea of flat files is to reduce the dependencies that a program requires, so that an entire database doesn't have to be bundled with the program. In some languages, like python, there is already support for databases like SQLite, negating many of the advantages that flat files have. However, if reading and writing is only done rarely, there really is no point in increasing the complexity of the code to implement an SQL engine.

In my database for flat files, one of the main things I have to reconcile is caching and database persistence. One very important thing is to ensure that databases do not lose data, so I've been trying to figure out a good way to do so. So far, I cache all the objects in memory, and the only time that the file is ever touched is when it is updated. I'm working on embedding transactions into the database, though I don't think I'll be able to go as far as ACID compliance. That will likely be the subject of a future post, as I haven't been spending as much time on it as I'd like to.
